eCourts MMP achievements

Computerization and WAN connectivity
The Wide Area Network (WAN) Project under eCourts project is aimed at connecting all District and Subordinate court complexes, spread across the country using various technologies like OFC, RF, VSAT. So far, 2977 sites have been commissioned out of 2992 sites with 10 Mbps to 100 Mbps bandwidth speed (completing 99.5% sites). This forms the backbone for the eCourts project ensuring data connectivity in courts across the length and breadth of the country.
Many courts under the eCourts project are located in far flung areas, termed as Technically Not Feasible (TNF) sites, where terrestrial cable cannot be used. These sites are being connected using alternative means like RF, VSAT, Submarine cable etc. In the COVID-19 scenario, this WAN connectivity enabled better Video Conferencing facilities and improved access to justice.

CIS and COVID Management Software Patch
Case Information Software (CIS) which forms the basis for the e court services is based on customized Free and Open-Source Software (FOSS) which has been developed by NIC.Currently, CIS National Core Version 3.2 is being implemented in District Courts and the CIS National Core Version 1.0 is being implemented for the High Courts.
Every single case has been provided a Unique Identification code which is called CNR number and QR Code. This has led to the development of National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) as a new communication pipeline for judicial data transmission
To ensure smooth functioning of Courts during COVID-19 pandemic, a new software patch has been developed to help in smart scheduling of cases.Courts can now hear urgent cases in scheduled time slots and accommodate the convenience of lawyers to prevent conflicting engagements and has proved to be effective in managing overcrowding in court premises.

The National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG)
National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) is a database of orders, judgments and case details of 18,735 District & Subordinate Courts and High Courts created as an online platform under the eCourts Project. Data is updated on a near real-time basis by the connected District and Taluka courts. It provides data relating to judicial proceedings/decisions of all computerized district and subordinate courts of the country. All High Courts have also joined the National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) through web services, providing easy access facility to the litigant public.
Through the eCourts services platform using elastic search technology, currently litigants can access case status information in respect of 26.06 crore cases and more than 26.91 crore orders / judgments pertaining to these computerized courts as on date. On 14.09.2023, Supreme Court of India has onboarded its data on National Judicial Data Grid.
Case data is available on NJDG for both civil and criminal cases with the ability to perform drill-down analysis based on the age of the case as well as the State and District.
NJDG works as a monitoring tool to identify, manage & reduce pendency of cases. It helps to provide timely inputs for making policy decisions to reduce delays in disposing of cases and helps in reducing case pendency. It also facilitates better monitoring of court performance and systemic bottlenecks, and, thus, serves as an efficient resource management tool. To track cases related to land disputes, Land Records data of 26 States have been linked with NJDG.
World Bank praised the National Judicial Data Grid in the Ease of Doing Business report for 2018, that it made possible to generate case management reports, thereby making it easier to enforce contracts.
In consonance with the National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) announced by the Government of India, Open Application Programming Interface (API) has been provided to the Central & State Government to allow easy access to the NJDG data using a departmental ID and access key. This will allow the institutional litigants to access the NJDG data for their evaluation and monitoring purposes. It is proposed to expand the facility to non-institutional litigants as well in future.
Recently, reasons for delay have been included in NJDG. The inclusion of feature specifying the reasons for delay on the NJDG portal has the potential to keep a proper track on issues which the judiciary faces while adjudicating cases and consequently enables them and the decision makers to take various steps in the direction of redressing the burgeoning pendency of cases. Apart from that, individual reason for delay highlights the problems at a granular level, which otherwise would be cumbersome to be tracked upon and thereby remedied.

Virtual Courts
Virtual CourtsA novel concept of virtual courts has been introduced under the eCourts project to deal with petty traffic offence cases. The concept is aimed at reducing footfalls in the courts by eliminating the physical presence of violator or advocate in the court. Virtual court can be managed by virtual judge whose jurisdiction can be extended to entire state and working hours may be 24X7. Neither litigant need to come to court nor judge will have to physically preside over the court. Thus, precious judicial time and manpower will be saved.
As on 30.06.2024, there are 28 such courts in 21 States / UTs viz. Delhi (2), Haryana, Chandigarh, Gujarat (2), Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala (2), Maharashtra (2), Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir (2), Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand (2), Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, Rajasthan and Manipur (2).
Facility is provided for Litigants to file the plaint electronically through e-Filing and pay the Court Fees or Fine online through pay.ecourts.gov.in. Litigant can view the status of the case also online through various channels created for service delivery hence the entire exercise can be done sitting at home. Over 5.26 crore cases have been handled by 28 virtual courts and in more than 56 lakhs cases, online fine of more than Rs. 579.40 crores have been realized till 30.06.2024.

Video Conferencing
Video ConferencingVideo conferencing emerged as the mainstay of the Courts during the Covid lockdown period as physical hearings and normal court proceedings in the congregational mode were not possible. Since Covid lockdown started, The District & Subordinate courts heard 2.35,64,731 cases while the High Courts heard 87,08,727 cases (totalling 3.22 crore) till 30.06.2024 using video conferencing.
The Supreme Court heard 7,54,443 hearings till 04.06.2024 since the beginning of lockdown period. To bring about uniformity and standardization in the conduct of VC, an overarching order was passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on 6th April 2020 which gave legal sanctity and validity to the court hearings done through VC. Further, VC rules were framed by a 5-judge committee which was circulated to all the High Courts for adoption after local contextualization. A total of 28 High Courts have implemented Video Conferencing rules. Additionally, under the jurisdiction of these High Courts, District Courts of all have adopted the Video Conferencing rules as on 30.06.2024. As part of the “Atma Nirbhar App Challenge” Indian made Video Conferencing App, Bharat VC, has been shortlisted and is under trial for use as uniform Video Conferencing platform. One video conference equipment each has been provided to all Court Complexes including taluk level courts and additionally funds have been sanctioned for additional VC equipment for 14,443 court rooms. Funds for setting up 2506 VC Cabins have been made available. Additional 1500 VC Licenses have been acquired. VC facilities are already enabled between 3240 court complexes and corresponding 1272 jails. A sum of Rs. 7.60 crore has been released for procurement of 1732 Document Visualizers.
The Uttarakhand High Court has started mobile e-courts van equipped with Wi-Fi and computers for video conferencing for speedy disposal of cases in remote hill areas of the state which do not have easy access to courts. A similar initiative was made functional by High Court of Telangana as well.

Live Streaming
Live Streaming of video conferencing of proceedings has been started in High Courts of Gujarat, Orissa, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Patna, Gauhati and Madhya Pradesh and Hon’ble Supreme Court of India thus allowing media and other interested persons to join the proceedings.
Under the guidance of eCommittee, Supreme Court of India, a sub-committee was constituted for framing Model Rules for Live Streaming. The said rules have been forwarded to Computer Committee of High Courts for the feedback and suggestion.

eFiling
eFilingAn e filing system (version 1.0) has been rolled out for the electronic filing of legal papers. This allows the lawyers to access and upload documents related to the cases from any location 24X7 which makes coming to the court for filing of papers unnecessary. Further the details of the case entered in the eFiling application are consumed in the CIS software and hence chances of mistakes are minimized.
The new e-filing 3.0 Portal was inaugurated on 9th April 2021 and is accessible on https://filing.ecourts.gov.in. In the new version, new tab is provided which allows Advocates and litigants to record their oath with in-system video recording while uploading documents. The new version has also provided new dashboard including the options of my partners, Case Filing, Vakalatnama, pleading, e-payments, applications and portfolio. Help section provided in the new version provides tutorial videos, FAQ and user manual. It also provided option to litigant to send offer to the Advocates. The new portal also provides the option of indexing of the documents for the Advocates.
Draft eFiling rules have been formulated and circulated to the High Courts for adoption. A total of 25 High Courts have adopted the model rules of e-Filing as on 30.06.2024. An SOP has been formulated by a High-level committee comprising of judges of High Courts for providing a uniform set of guidelines for usage of eFiling in Courts. There has been a surge in the number of lawyers and litigants registering for the e filing during the COVID-19 pandemic.
To promote eFiling, all Central & State Government departments including the PSUs have been requested to use e filing in all commercial disputes coming up in the commercial courts. Instructions have been issued by eCommittee to all HCs to ensure that all Government litigation should be e-filed by January 2022. A similar communication has also been shared by the DoJ to all Ministries requesting to use e filing in all Government litigation by January 2022.

ePayments
epaymentse-Filing of cases requires the option for electronic payment of fees which includes court fees, fines and penalties which are directly payable to the Consolidated Fund. Online payment of court fees, fines, penalties and judicial deposits has been initiated through https://pay.ecourts.gov.in from 14th August 2018. Introduction of electronic collection of court fees and other civil payments requires appropriate amendments in the existing Court Fees Act enacted by the various State Governments besides opening a bank account in a Nationalized Bank or in other bank suitable to receive, hold and disburse such payments electronically.
DoJ has taken up the matter with Chief Secretaries and Registrar General of High Courts to expedite the enactment / modification in existing enactment to enable epayment of court fees. The eCommittee of the Supreme Court has also proposed that since the existing Court Fees Act provides for refunds, administrative instructions may be issued by High Courts to allow one-time lump sum deposit as court fees which can be adjusted and balance refunded at the end of the proceedings in the same manner that court fees in respect of proceedings withdrawn or compromise are refunded in part.
A total of 22 High Courts have implemented ePayments in their respective jurisdictions whereas the Court Fees Act has been amended in 24 High Courts till 30.06.2024.
The ePayments can be enabled through an electronic payment process like SBI ePay, GRAS, e-GRAS, JeGRAS, HimKosh etc.Apart from payments being made through credit / debit cards and bank transfers, other applications like BHIM App, RuPay etc. can also be leveraged along with private wallets like Paytm, Google Pay etc.

eSewa Kendra
eSewa Kendras have been rolled out to bridge the digital divide by providing e filing services to lawyers and litigants. Covering all High Courts and one District Court as pilot project, it is being expanded to cover all court complexes. Government has released Rs. 12.54 crore for setting up eSewa Kendras. The eSewa Kendras are being set up at the entry point of the court complexes with the intention of facilitating the lawyer or litigant who needs any kind of assistance ranging from information to facilitation and e filing. As on 30.06.2024, 1072 eSewa Kendra’s have been made functional in District Courts under 25 High Courts. These have been funded both by the eCourts project as well out of state funding.
Computerization and WAN connectivity
eSewa Kendra at District and Sessions Court Rajgarh (M.P.)
On 30 October 2020, India’s first e-Resource Center was inaugurated at Nagpur in Maharashtra. The e-Resource Centre “Nyay Kaushal” will facilitate e-filing of cases in Supreme Court India, High Courts and District Courts across the country. It will also assist the lawyers and litigants in access online e-Courts services and shall be the saviour for those who cannot afford the technology. It will provide benefits in saving time, avoidance of exertion, travelling long distances, and saving cost by offering facilities of e-filing of cases across the country, to conduct the hearing virtually, Scanning, Accessing e-Courts services etc.

eCourt Services
As part of eCourt project, 7 platforms have been created to provide real time information on case status, cause lists, judgements etc. to lawyers/Litigants through SMS Push and Pull (2,00,000 SMS sent daily), Email (2,50,000 sent daily), multilingual and tactile eCourts services Portal (35 lakh hits daily), JSC (Judicial Service centres) and Info Kiosks. In addition, Electronic Case Management Tools (ECMT) have been created with Mobile App for lawyers (total 2.47 Cr downloads till 30.06.2024) and JustIS app for judges (20,362 downloads till 30.06.2024).

Judgment Search Portal
A new ‘Judgment & Order Search’ portal has been inaugurated for the convenience of its stakeholders in searching judgments easily. The new portal for judgments search is set to provide a repository for Judgments and Final Orders of the High Courts. The ‘Judgment Search’ segment could be reached at https://judgments.ecourts.gov.in, which encapsulates the features such as search by Bench, Case Type, Case Number, Year, Petitioner/ Respondent Name, Judge Name, Act, Section, Decision: From Date, To Date and Full Text Search. The most important feature of this portal is using a free text search engine, which finds out judgments based on a given keyword or combination of keywords.

NSTEP
National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP)-2
National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP) has been launched for technology enabled process serving and issuing of summons. A GPS enabled device is given to the Bailiff for the service of summons leading to greater transparency and speedy delivery of processes. It provides real time status update of service of summons besides tracking of geographical coordinates of the process server at the time of serving. It has currently been implemented in 28 States/ UTs.

Justice Clock
Justice ClockTo make effective use of database created through National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) and to make the information available to public, LED Display Message Sign Board System have been installed. The purpose of Justice Clock is to bring awareness to the public about justice sector, advertising the various schemes of the department and to give status of various fields to the public. The electronic signage system is measuring approximate 10×7 feet, provides information about disposal by courts, various schemes and services offered in the court complexes and to give status of various fields to the public and other information through which the citizens can benefit.
The schemes of the Department of Justice and how citizens can benefit from the projects such as eCourts, Access to Justice and Legal Aid to Poor are displayed on the Clock. Information regarding top district courts which disposed highest percentage of cases for 2 years, 2-5 year and above 10 years old court cases and other information through which the citizens can benefit such as legal aid programs and access to justice schemes is displayed on the Justice Clock.
A total of 39 Justice Clocks are functional in 25 High Courts. An amount of Rs. 13 lakhs has been sanctioned by e-committee for each Justice Clock.

Secure, Scalable and Sugamya Website as a Service (S3WAAS)
A new divyang friendly website for eCommittee, based on S3WaaS platform is live in 13 regional languages including English & Hindi.
All other court websites are being upgraded from the existing system to the S3WAAS platform which are secure, scalable and accessible. Content published on the website is accessible so that even Divyang users will be able to access the information using assistive technologies.

Digitization of Records
Digitization of RecordsThe eCommittee of the Supreme Court of India had formed a Sub Committee for the formulation of the SOP on Digitization of Records. The SOP has recently been finalized and circulated to the High Courts for their comments.
The SOP plans to establish dedicated Judicial Digital Repositories (JDRs) at the High Court level to manage and preserve the digital records of the HCs as well as the district courts under its administrative control. Similar JDR is planned for the Supreme Court.
The SOP recommends defining and implementing a comprehensive Information Governance (IG) policy considering the enormous volume of e-filing and production of digital records by the courts. It provides comprehensive technical specifications, open standard based file formats and guidelines for digitization. It provides guidelines for preparation of Submission Information Package (SIP) and method for transfer of digitized records to JDR. The Judicial Digital Repositories (JDRs) have to be audited and certified as per the ISO 16363 for their overall trustworthiness and reliability in the long-term considering the need for legal admissibility of digital records. As on 14.06.2024, 311.10 Cr. pages have been digitized across High Courts and District Courts.

Information, Education & Communication (IEC)
As part of IEC campaign several initiatives have been taken to educate the Judicial Officers, lawyers and public about the facilities available under eCourts Project, such as
eCommittee Website
Launched exclusively for the e-Committee and linked to the website of the DoJ for dissemination of information relating to eCourts Project amongst all stakeholders and to enable High Courts to upload their achievements and best practices.
YouTube Channel
Under the title ‘eCourts Services’ for video tutorials oneFiling.12 help videos in 7 regional languages have been uploaded apart from Hindi and English and circulated for advocates as part of awareness, through eFiling portal help desk and also on social media through eCommittee YouTube channel.
Awareness and familiarization of e-filing
Webinars for Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, Goa, Maharashtra and Delhi were held.Manual and Brochure on eFiling is made available on eFiling Portal.
eCommittee Training at National and State level
Training and awareness programmes on the ICT have been conducted covering nearly 6, 53,676 stakeholders including Judges of States, Courts staff and Advocates. 25 Master Trainers have been trained in each High Court who in turn has already trained 5409 Master Trainers across the country. These, 5409 Master Trainers have in turn imparted training programme on eCourts Services and e-filing in each district of the country for advocates in their regional languages and also identified Master Trainer Advocates. e-Committee has acknowledged and appreciated Master trainers by issuing Digital certificates with QR Code for online verification by hosting certificates on eCommittee website. These certificates can be authenticated by scanning QR Code from mobile.

Awards and Recognition
eCourts Project has been awarded Digital India Award 2022 in “Silver Category for Digital Empowerment of Citizens” by Hon’ble President of India under the patronage of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India for Judgment and Search Portal.
eCourts Project has also been awarded the National Award 2021-2022 in ‘Gold Category II – Excellence in providing Citizen Centric Delivery’ for Judgement & Orders Search Portal’, under the patronage of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances for exemplary implementation of e-governance initiatives.
eCourts Project has also been awarded the National Award 2020-2021 in ‘Gold Category I – Excellence in Government Process Re-engineering for Digital Transformation’, under the patronage of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances for exemplary implementation of e-governance initiatives.
eCourts services has been awarded the prestigious Digital India Award 2020 instituted under the aegis of the National Portal of India for Excellence in Digital governance.
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India has awarded the eCourts Project with the Gems of Digital India Award 2018 (Jury’s Choice) for excellence in e-Governance.