Procedure for Complaints Against Advocates/Lawyers

The complaint can be filed in English, in Hindi, or in a regional language where the language has been declared to be a state language. In those cases where the complaint is in Hindi or in any other regional language, the State Bar Council shall translate the complaint into English whenever a disciplinary matter is sent to the Bar Council of India as per the Advocates Act.

Every complaint shall be accompanied by the fees prescribed in the Bar Council of India Rules.

Removal of Defects and Request for Particulars in a Complaint

The Secretary of the Bar Council may require the complainant to pay the prescribed fees if the proper fee has not been paid. He can also call the complainant to remove any defects and call for the particulars or copies of the complaint or other documents as may be considered necessary.

On a complaint being found to be in order, it shall be registered and placed before the Bar Council for such order as it may deem fit to pass.

Withdrawal and Settlement of Complaints

No matter taken up by the State Bar Council (either suo motu or on a complaint made by other parties) for misconduct of advocates shall be dropped solely by reason of its having been withdrawn, settled, or otherwise compromised, or because the complainant does not want to proceed with the enquiry.

Before referring a complaint for misconduct of an advocate to one of its Disciplinary Committees to be specified by it, the Bar Council may require a complainant to furnish further and better particulars or may call for comments from the advocate complained against, within a time to be fixed by it.

Show Cause Notice

Once the Bar Council has referred the complaint to a disciplinary committee, the Registrar should expeditiously send a notice to the advocate.

The notice will ask the concerned advocate to show cause within a specified date, on the complaint made against him and to submit the statement of defence, documents and affidavits in support of the defence.

It will also further inform him that in case of his non-appearance on the fixed date of hearing, the matter shall be heard and determined in his absence. Appearance usually includes appearance by an advocate or through a duly authorised representative.

Time of Enquiry

The Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee will fix the date, hour and place of the enquiry. This date will not ordinarily be later than thirty days from the receipt of the reference. The Registrar has to give notice of the date, hour and place to the complainant or other person aggrieved, the advocate concerned, and the Attorney General or the Additional Solicitor General of India or the Advocate General, as the case may be.

Notices

The notices shall, subject to necessary modification, be in Form Nos. E-1 and E-2. It shall be sent to the advocates appearing for the parties. Notice to a party not appearing by the advocate shall be sent to the address as furnished in the complaint or in the grounds of appeal.

The cost of the notices shall be borne by the complainant unless the Disciplinary Committee otherwise directs.

The notices may be sent ordinarily through messenger or by registered post and served on the advocate or the party concerned or his agent or other person as provided for in Order V of the Civil Procedure Code.

Notice may also be sent for service through any Civil Court.

Where the notice sent to any party cannot be served using the normal methods listed above, it may be served by affixing a copy in some conspicuous place in the office of the Bar Council, and also upon some conspicuous part of the house (if any) in which the party concerned is known to have last resided or had his office.

Appearance and Witnesses

Parties can appear in person or by an advocate who should file a vakalatnama giving the name of the Bar Council in which he is enrolled, his residential address, telephone number if any, and his address for service of notices.

A Senior Advocate is entitled to appear with another advocate who has filed a vakalatnama.

The Bar Council or its Disciplinary Committee may at any stage of a proceeding appoint an advocate to appear as Amicus Curiae. Such advocate may be paid such fee as the Council or the Committee may decide.

Excepting when the Committee has otherwise directed, service on the advocate shall be deemed to be sufficient service on the parties concerned, even if copies of the notices are in addition sent to the parties, whether the parties have or have not been served.

Unless otherwise indicated, where more than one Advocate appears for the same party, it is sufficient to serve the notice on any of them.

Proceedings and Exhibits

The Disciplinary Committee shall hear the Attorney General or the Additional Solicitor General of India or the Advocate General, as the case may be or their advocate and parties or their advocates.

The matters can be heard and determined on documents and affidavits. Unless the committee is of the opinion that it should be in the interest of justice to permit cross-examination of the deponents or to take oral evidence, in which case the procedure for the trial of civil suits shall as far as possible be followed.